# **Quality of Service (QoS)**

_QoS basis on queuing theory **(FIFO)**. Modern **converged networks centralize data, video and voice (VoIP)** in the same network infrastructure making all services share the same bandwidth, wich can cause problems related with **jitter (variation in delay)**, **latency (delay)** and **loss of data (dropped packets when queue buffer is full)**._ 

_The point of having QoS is to **classified network traffic with FIFO queuing for dispatch packets in a prioritized order** dependig on it´s type, cost and demand. But this means that if a service is getting better attendance (usually VoIP have better QoS because it´s traffic packets are very small) the other services start to get worst performance. QoS also looks for a congestion-free network. The **congestion is caused by having higher input bandwidth than the output** ISP bandwidth can handle. **QoS only mitigates temporary periods of congestion, doesn´t solve it** (the only way to avoid congestion is to have same speed bandwith for in-out traffic, which cost more money)._

## Classification & Marking

_To know how kind of packets prioritize over the network we need to classify them based on the following characteristics._

### Class of Service (CoS)

_**L2 marking**. Is set in a **3 bit space into the 802.1Q header** that can go from 0-7, giving more priority in dispatching over packets marked at a higher number. The **CoS 0 (default)** is set for **best-effort traffic (BE)**._
- **CoS 7 & 6** are reserved for network usage (routing protocols and network control).
- **CoS 5 (EF)** is used for **VoIP payload (spoken voice)**. EF = Expedit Forwarding.
- **CoS 3 (AF)** is used for **voice signalling (the phone ringing & synchronization)**. AF = Assured Forwarding.

### Differentiated Service Code Point (DSCP)

_**L3 marking**. Is set in a **6 bit space into the IP header**, also called **Type of service (ToS)**. Dispatchs first packets marked with higher numbers from 0-7 with 64 different combination possible. As CoS the **ToS 0 (default)** is set for **best-effort traffic (BE or DF)**. Each numeric value of ToS can be called by an specific identifier which means the same._
- **ToS 46 (EF)** is used for **VoIP payload (spoken voice)**. EF = Expedit Forwarding.
- **ToS 34 (AF41)** is used for **Interactive video (SD)**. 
- **ToS 32 (CS4)** is used for **Streaming video**. 
- **ToS 26 (AF31)** is used for **Mission Critical Data**. 
- **ToS 24 (CS3)** is used for **Voice Signalling (the phone ringing & synchronization)**. CS3 = Call Signalling Traffic.
- **ToS 8 (CS1)** is used for **Scavanger** traffic. Considered "junk traffic" that uses bandwidth (like gaming, peer-to-peer media sharing or worms) and slow-downs the overall performance in the networks.
  
### ACLs & Network Based Application Recognition (NBAR)

_In **CoS & DSCP the traffic is self-marked by it´s traffic source** but we can **manually define QoS marking by using ACLs** to **identify L3 and L4 traffic** that we want to prioritize._

_NBAR similarly to the ACL usage utilize well-known **data signatures from L4 up to L7** that Cisco´s have defined and we can use them to identify and then prioritize traffic._

## Shaping & Policing

_Can be used to **control/limits traffic rate** and **take actions if the rate gets above a configured limit**._
- **Shaping:** **Buffers the excedant traffic** and dispatch it when the traffic slow downs. 
- **Policing:** **Drops or re-marks excess traffic** to enforce the specified rate limit.

## Congestion Management

_It´s the manipulation of the queue so get better service to the traffic that requires it. Cisco QoS uses **Modular Queuing CLI (MQC)** divided in **3 main sections**, **Class Maps** to define the traffic on interest, **Policy Maps** that sets the rules, priorities and actions to the traffic and the **Service Policies** which apply the policies to an interface._

- **Class Based Weighted fair Queuing (CBWFQ):** Gives **bandwidth guaranty based on traffic types**.
- **Low Latency Queue (LLQ):** Similar to CBWFQ but with a **priority queue**.

```
// Group the interest traffic (Class Map)
(config)# class-map [traffic_group_name]
(config)# match ip dscp [dscp_alias] // As "ef", "cs3", "af41", etc...

// Define the percentage of utilization in case of congestion (Policy Map)
(config)# policy-map [policy_name]
(config)# class [traffic_group_name]
(config)# shape average [bandwidth_limit_rate_to_start_buffering]
(config)# priority percent [bandwidth_guaranteed_utilization_in_case_of_congestion]
(config)# {service-policy [nested_policies]}?

// Setup utilization & shaping for remaining traffic types
(config)# class class-default
(config)# shape average [bandwidth_limit_rate_to_start_buffering]
(config)# fair-queue

// Apply policy to the outbound interface in WAN for dispatching (Service Policy)
(config)# interface {gigabit | ethernet} {0-X}/{0-X}
(config-if)# bandwidth [100%_of_capable_interface_bandwidth_kbps]
(config-if)# service-policy out [policy_name]
```