# **Network Automation & Programmability**

_The automation of networks through programmability is used for:_

- Device configuration (Multiple devices in batch)
- Initial device provisioning
- Software & Configuration version control
- Collecting statistics from devices
- Compliance verification
- Reporting & Assurance (standarized device configuration)
- Troubleshooting (Automatically correction on events by scripts)

_Data Serialization_

- **JSON**: Readable, lightweight, most popular formatting type. Object/Dictionary (key-value pair) + Array with nesting data structures. REST.
- **XML**: Data contained in object tags. SOAP.
- **YAML**: Block-level identation, key-value pair & ´-´ identification of sections and data structures
- **YANG**: Standarized data modelling for operational and configuration of a network device.

## Application Programming Interfaces (API)

```
Protocol: http | https
URN: www.demo.cisco.com/api/resouce.html
URL: https://www.demo.cisco.com/api/resouce.html
URI: https://www.demo.cisco.com/api/resouce.html#fragment
Fragment: #fragment
```

_Network Management APIs_
**Northbound APIs**
_Connects the Control Layer with the upper application layers in most cases using REST APIs_

**Southbound APIS**
_Divides the SDN management into layers, usually exists an Infrastructure Layer (where all net hardware lives) and a Control Layer where the SDN Controller (DNA Center) manage everything_

- **NETCONF**: Remotely reads or applies changes to the network device. XML encoded. Uses YANG. Divided in **Content**, **Operations**, **Messages (Remote Procedure Calls RPC)** and **Transport (SSH or TLS)**.
- **RESTCONF**: Built over NETCONF, uses XML or JSON. Transport via HTTP and HTTPS.
- **gRPC**: **Google RPC open source**. Google Protocol Buffers encoding is used. Transport runs uver HTTP/2. Used to collecting telemetry statistics for IoT.

_API Operations_

- Create - POST
- Read - GET
- Update - PATCH
- Delete - DELETE

_Response Codes_

- 1XX: Informational
- 2XX: Success Connection
  - 200: OK
  - 201: Created
  - 204: No Content (successfully deleted)
- 3XX: Redirection
- 4XX: Client Error
  - 400: Bad Request | Malformed Syntax
  - 401: Unauthorized
  - 403: Forbidden
  - 404: Not Found
- 500: Internal Server Error

## Configuration Management Tools

_Centralize API management devices with little programming knowledge. Have established development practices including version control and testing._

### Ansible

- Popular Cisco´s devices management choice
- **Ansible Playbooks**: YAML files that instucts running settings
- **Ansible Inventory**: Python script modules/files defining all managed hosts by the **centralized control station without extra software**.
- Python2/Python3. Simpler to use.
- **Agentless**, don´t need plugins on devices to be managed.
- **Push model**, insert configurations to net devices.
- Communicates SSH by default

```
// Verify Ansible is running on Unix
$ cd ansible
$ ansible localhost -m ping

// Verify registered network hosts to manage (FQDNs)
$ sudo cat /etc/hosts

// Verify Ansible Inventory
$ sudo cat /etc/ansible/hosts

// Verify YAML config file for a device
$ cat host_vars/[device_fqdn].yml

// Verify Ansible connectivity through all Inventory
ansible$ ansible -m ping all

// Push configurations (YAML) to device(s)
ansible$ ansible-playbook [yaml_config_file].yml
```

### Puppet

- **Puppet Master**: Linux server that controls other agents
- **Manifest**: Defines the devices properties. Used to **monitoring configuration consistency**
- Ruby. Use of a propietary DSL rather than YAML.
- **Agentful**, needs an agent (plugin) running on net devices.
- **Pull model**, checks every 30 mins (default) net device status

### Chef

- Similar to Puppet with terminology change to ¨Recipies¨ and ¨Cookbook¨.
- Ruby scripted.
- Pull model.
- Agentful

## Software Define Networking

- Data Plane (Forwarding): The plain data received/sent that only travereses the device.
- Control Plane: Traffic dedicated on how the device will forward the traffic (ex. routing protocols, Spanning-tree updates) based on protocols decisitions.
- Management Plane: Traffic dedicated to the device configuration such as SSH, SNMP or an API

_In traditional networking infrastructures the devices manage their own data and control plane individually. With SDNs the data plane is isolated from the control plane by managing this one in a centralized controller. In Hybrid SDN architecture the devices keep retaining a little of the control plane intelligence but the majority of this stills managed by other entity._

**Cisco´s SDNs**

- **APIC**: Application Policy Infrastructure Controller. Designed to **manage data center** environments with Nexus Switches. Uses Cisco ACI.
- **DNA Center (legacy APIC-EM)**: Enterprise Module. Designed to manage enterprise environments such as campus, branch and WAN. Runs on **Cisco UCN**. **Intent Based Networking (IBN)** defining Application Policies for QoS assurance from a dashboard that manage globally configurations and monitors the network.