# **Cloud Computing**

_Some cloud advantages, listed as follows:_
- **Scalability:** Ability to regulate the service in accordance with their current requirements. Flexibility through cloud bursting.
- **Business Agility:** Handle expected/unexpected changes in load. Reduced time to deploy an application into production.
- **Cost Efficiency:** Directly proportional cost with no provicioning for the peak as a permanent fixture. Large CapEx costs reduces to monthly OpEx cloud rentals. No owned hardware depreciation.
- **Competitive Advantage:** Organizations can respond quicly to evolving market trends and focus on growing their core business.
- **Productivity:** The IT staff focus in improving core applications rather than mantain or troubleshoot hardware infrastructure.
- **Availability & Reliability:** The provider data center is built by qualified specialist according to best practices such as ISO 9001(QoS) and 27001 (security). SLA guaranteed.

## Cloud Characteristics & Definitions
- **On-demand Self-service:** The clients define/configure the amount of network resources to use.
- **Rapid Elasticity:** The resources needed can increase/decrease according to the demand.
- **Broad Network Access:** The cloud services can be reached from any place over a network connection.
- **Resource pooling:** The resources are shared between several users (lowering the costs compared with On-Premises infrasctructure CapEx)- No separated deedicated servers. Virtualization.
- **Measured Service:** The clients only pays for the cloud resources provisioned.

**Virtualization:** It allows resource pooling where multiple hosts **share the same underlying hardware**.

**Clustering:** Contrary on virtualization is the combination of **multiple physical systems into a single virtual systems**. It provides redundancy and improved performance.

**Hypervisor:** Is software that allows one host computer or server to support multiple guest machines by virtually sharing hardware resources such as memory and processing. 
- **Type 1 Hypervisors:** It´s run on top the **hardware** to allow multiple VMs. Used in Data Centers. VMware ESXi (vSphere suite), Microsoft Hyper-V, Red Hat KVM, Oracle VM Server, Citrix XenServer.
- **Type 2 Hypervisors:** It´s **run on top the host´s OS** for lab testing & virtualization. VMware Workstation, Parallels, VirtualBox, QEMU.

## Cloud Service Models
_Define where the customer and provider areas of responsability are, and at what level the customer gains access. The three models build in top of one another._

- **IaaS:** Infrastructure as a service. The provider supports the **facility**, **network**, **storage**, **computational power** and **hypervisor** needed to the customer needs. Only Data, Applications and OS is supported and mantained by the customer side.
- **PaaS:** Platform as a service. Combines all **IaaS services supported + the OS** that the host is running to provide the customer a **custom environment** to work with.
- **SaaS:** Software as a service. All the cloud services are offered on top the data center stack. The hosts can be running a **complete pre-defined data center environment and applications in the providers side** (as Office365) without having any infrastructure or specialized setup.
- **COLO:** Bare metal solution, **not cloud service model**. The **data center facilities (electricity, location, cooling, etc...) are set by a provider** with an space rental OpEx, but the client must bring their own hardware & software infrastructure to be cluster.
- **On-Premise:** Bare metal solution, **not cloud service model**. The network, computing and application infrastructure **(all data center) is CapEx provided by the customer**. 

## Cloud Deployment Infrastructures

- **Public Cloud:** Common deployment model. Is an open model where anyone can use cloud´s infrastructure which it may be owned, managed and operated by a business. **AWS**, **MS Azure**, **IBM Bluemix**, **Salesforce**.
- **Private Cloud:** The **cloud infrastructure is provisioned for a single organization** (comprising multiple clients or business units). Most suitable for large companies because it represents an outweight initial effort and cost to setup infrastructure and automate workflows. The cloud can be provided by a third party or built in totally by the same user (ex. US Department on Defense Cloud mounted with AWS)
- **Community Cloud:** Cloud infrastructure provided for exclusive use by a group of organization that share the same cloud requirements (mission, security, policy and comliance considerations). Least common deployment model, used in governments environments.
- **Hybrid Cloud:** Combination on any cloud deployment infrastructures. Many clouds remain as unique entities but are bound together by standarized or propietary technologies that enables data and application portability. **Cloud bursting:** is the **usage of external cloud infrastructures to expand capabilities** (ex. if a private cloud demands more memory it can access the resources from a public cloud).