# **Wireless Networking**

_WiFi services are defined in the IEEE **802.11** standard._

- **Ad-Hoc Networks:** 2 or more stations (wireless devices) communicate directly with each other. **Peer-to-peer** connection with no scalability pourposes. Also known as **Independent Basic Service Set IBSS**:
  - **WPAN:** Wireless Personal Area Network. Devices are **<10 mts** like **Bluetooth**. 
- **Infrastructure Mode:** Stations (wireless devices) **communicacte via a centralized Wireless Access Point (AP)**:
  - **WiFi Direct:** Operates connecting devices to an AP but also allow them to be part in a peer-to-peer communication. Doesn´t operate in Ad-Hoc IBSS mode even it can connect directly stations. It´s a WPAN derivation for infrastructure mode.
  - **WMAN:** Wireless Metropolitan Area. Covers a large area such as a city.
  - **WLAN:** Wireless Local Area Network. Provide access to a campus network (wired), without need for a cable. Devices are **<100 mts** of an **Access Point**. 
- **Mesh Networks:** One AP ratio (signal frequency, often 2.4 GHz) is used to serve clients and the other connects to the backhaul (traffic dedicated to connect network devices, 5 GHz). Poppular nowadays for home usage in dual-band supported devices.


- **Wireless Bridges:** Connect wired network infrastructures to others wirelessly. Used for maintain connectivity between buildings where a cable is not possible.
- **Wireless Access Point (AP)**: 
  - All AP speed is **Half-duplex**. 
  - Provides connectivity between wireless stations and the rest network (wired) via a **Distribution System (DS)** that connects the AP to the wired networks. 
  - Centralize access and control to the stations in an infrastructure mode, **the coverage area of this operations is called a Basic Service Area (BSA)**. 
  - All the devices in the same BSS must be identified by a **BSSID retreived from it´s MAC address**.
  - All the coverage area from an AP, called **BSA or wireless cell**, is also **identified by one or multiple Service Set ID (SSID)**. Each SSID can have independant security settings and can be mapped to different VLANs. 
  - The AP **broadcast** its WLAN information and SSID requirements through **beacon frames**. Can be disabled.
  - An **SSID can be replicated accross multiple AP** to give a **larger coverage area** through different frequency channels, known as **Extended Service Set (ESS)**

### _Wireless ISM Frequencies_
- **2.4 GHz**: 802.11, 802.11b, 802.11g
- **5.0 GHz**: 802.11a, 802.11ac
- **2.4 & 5.0 GHz (dual-band)**: 802.11n

### _Wireless Security Standards_
- **WEP**: Wireless Equivalent Privacy. RC4 Encryption.
- **WPA**: WiFi Protected Access. RC4 & TKIP Encryption.
  - **WPA Personal**: Uses pre-shared keys PSK´s
  - **WPA Enterprise**: Uses a **RADIUS AAA** server with protocol **802.1X**
- **WPA2**: AES & CCMP Encryption
- **WPA3**: AES, CCMP & KRACK attack protection.
 
## Wireless Lan Controller (WLC)
_Used as a central point of management for several Access Points. The 2 possible modes an Access Point operates is **standalone (autonomous system)** or **lightweight (controlled by a WLC)** based in the OS image installed. The way an AP in lighweight mode connects to the WLC is set as a **zero-touch provisioning (ZTP)** where the AP discovers by **DHCP(option 43)/DNS** the IP connection to the WLC and when established the AP downdloads it´s configurations from it. A WLC functions are: **authentication**, **roaming control**, **802.11-802.3 communication**, **radio frequency**, **security** and **QoS management**_ 
_The protocol used for WLCs to manage APs collections is the **Control And Provisioning of Wireless Access Points (CAPWAP)**. All WLC-AP communications are **encrypted inside DTLS CAPWAP tunnel** using **UDP ports 5246 & 5247**._ 

1. Configure Switch -> WLC connection
    ```
    // Configure a DHCP for Access-Point addressing and connection to WLC
    (config)# ip dhcp excluded-addresses [start_excluded] [end_excluded]
    (config)# ip dhcp pool [pool_name]
    (dhcp-config)# network [access_points_network] [netmask] 
    (dhcp-config)# default-router [management_svi_ipv4]
    (dhcp-config)# option 43 ip [wlc_ipv4]
    
    // Associate a VLAN + SVI for each SSID & the management of wireless devices
    (config)# vlan [vlan_ID]
    (config-vlan)# name [ssid_name]
    (config-vlan)# exit
    (config)# interface vlan [vlan_ID]
    (config-if)# ip address [default_gateway_for_ssid_members] [netmask]
    
    // Configure LAN Switch -> WLC link connection as TRUNK mode
    (config)# interface {ethernet | gigabit} {0-X}/{0-X}
    (config-if)# description [describe_link_2_WLC]
    (config-if)# switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q
    (config-if)# switchport mode trunk
    (config-if)# switchport trunk allowed vlan [management_and_ssid_vlans]
    
    // Configure LAN Switch -> each Access-Point
    (config)# interface {ethernet | gigabit} {0-X}/{0-X}
    (config-if)# description [describe_link_2_AP]
    (config-if)# switchport mode access
    (config-if)# switchport access vlan [ssid_vlan_ID]
    (config-if)# spanning-tree portfast
    ```
2. Add any RADIUS AAA Server for WPA2 Enterprise authentication
3. In WLC:
   1. Create a DHCP pool for each SSID to addressing wireless hosts.
   2. Associate a logical interface to each SSID
   3. Link the WANs to their respectives logical interfaces, configuring AAA & security services
4. Verify hosts connectivity to the A

- **Standalone Access-Points**: _The link between the LAN switch & the Access-Point must be **trunk**, including all **SSID VLANs**._
  
- **Lightweight/Managed Access Points**: _The link between the LAN switch & the Access-Point must be **trunk**, including all **SSID VLANs**. The link between LAN switch & the Access-Point must be **access** including only the **AP Management VLAN**. The lightweight Access Points can support some WLC **real-time operations** like **client handshake**, **beacon** announcement, **performance monitoring**, **encryption/decryption** and **communicate clients in power-safe mode** in order to facilitate WLC & network performance. The **Flex-Connect** protocol **enables an lightweight AP to communicate hosts in the same BSA without passing the traffic through the WLC** to improve the LAN response performance and velocity._