# **Security Landscape**

## Security Terminology
- **Threat**: Potential cause of hraming IT asset.
- **Vulnerability**: Weakness that compromise the security/functionallity of a system.
- **Exploit**: Usage of a vulnerability to attack a system.
- **Risk**: The possibility of being attacked.
- **Mitigation**: Technique to eliminate or reduce the potential and seriouness in suffering an attack
- **Malware**: Any malicious software.
  - **Viruses**: Software inserted in other software that can be spread by human action.
  - **Worms**: Similar to viruses but the malware spreading is self-propagating by itself to other systems.
  - **Trojan Horses**: Often used to back-door installation. Looks like legimit software with attatched malware.
  - **Ransomware**: Kidnaps the system by encrypting all data with attacker´s key.
- **IDS/IPS**: Intrusion Detection/Prevention System. Inspect packets up to L7 looking for traffic pattern or anomaly behaviour in the network using signatures to defined policies to block certain trafic. This both mechanisms can be included in Next Generation Firewalls.
- **Firewall**: One-way protection mechanism, which prevents un-desired traffic to the network (but allows all outgoing communications). They mantain a connection a table contrary of how a Packet Filter (ACL) works.
- **Transport Layer Security (TLS)**: SSL inprovement. Uses symmetric cryptography to encrypt transmitted data, commonly used in the HTTPS protocol for web site authentication. 

## **Switch Security**

### DHCP Snooping
_The clients of a DHCP server need a relay agent (ip helper address) to foward the broadcast DHCP Discovery message and be reply with an IP leasing. If **another DHCP server is connected to the same clients subnet this DHCP Server can be the one replying with invalid information for client assignation**. To avoid that we defined a **trusted snooping DHCP server** in the LAN switch to being able to receive incoming DHCP Offers only by a well-known port._
```
(config)# ip dhcp snooping
(config)# ip dhcp snooping vlan [vlan_id] //Repeat for all DHCP client´s VLANs
(config)# interface {gigabit | ethernet} {0-X}/{0-X} // Use on interface connected to Gateway (with the set ip-helper address)
(config-if)# ip dhcp snooping trust
```

### Dynamic ARP Inspection (DAI)
_**Man-in-the-middle and DoS** attack. A device attatched to the LAN **anticipates any ARP request from hosts to their default gateway** by doing a **Gratuitous ARP (CAM poisoning)**, where the attacker sends a **broadcast message to the switch indicating it´s MAC address and faking the real default gateway IP**. With that done, the switch **register in CAM the MitM fake MAC address** and all hosts will be unicasting traffic through it. To prevent this a **DHCP Snooping needs to be enable so the switch can map trusted assigned IPs with its real MACs**_

```
(config)# interface {gigabit | ethernet} {0-X}/{0-X} // Use on interface connected to Gateway (with the set ip-helper address)
(config-if)# ip arp inspection trust

(config)# ip arp inspection vlan [vlan_ID] //Repeat for all DHCP client´s VLANs
```

### Identity Based Networking (802.1X)
_Any **host (Supplicant)** that wants to connect in LAN or access WAN first send a message to the network **device (Authenticator)**, wich only conmmutes traffic to an **Authentication Server**. Then the supplicant is being asked for its username and password credentials and travel all the way back to the Autheticator > Authentication Server. **If the credentials are correct**, the Authenticator replys the Suplicant and the **commutation to other networks**, **interfaces in LAN (can be map to VLAN)** and **internet is allowed**._

### Switchports Security
_Defined a **mapping between allowed MAC addresses that can be attatched to certain switchport** and the **mechanisms in case of switchport violation**_

```
// Display interface security settings
# show port-security interface {gigabit | ethernet} {0-X}/{0-X} 

// Display port-MAC association table
# show port-security address

// Displays port summary its status and violations
# show port-security
```
```
(config)# interface {gigabit | ethernet} {0-X}/{0-X} 
(config-if)# switchport mode {access | trunk}
(config-if)# switchport port-security //By default allow 1 MAC at the time (no mattering the exact MAC attatched) and shutdowns if more than 1 hosts are connected
(config-if)# switchport port-security violation {shutdown | protect | restrict}
(config-if)# switchport port-security maximum [max_MAC_allowed]
(config-if)# switchport port-security mac-address {sticky | MAC_address} //Associate specific MAC to the port to be learned in next plug-in or manually set
```
- **Shutdown (default)**: The interface is placed in **error-disabled state** blocking all traffic. To enable the port again, you need to manually de-attatch any unauthorized MAC, shutdown and bring up the interface. It can also be **re-activated automatically again by a timer** using following commands:
  ```
  (config)# errdisable recovery cause psecure-violation
  (config)# errdisable recovery interval [secs]
  ```
- **Protect**: Traffic from unauthorized users is blocked and **fowards only authorized MACs**.
- **Restrict**: Keeps track of unauthorized addresses, **logging them in a violation counter** and dropping it´s traffic.



## Virtual Private Network (VPN)

_Provides a **virtual tunnel between LANs** across a **shared public channel** where **traffic is encrypted and authorized** only when AAA from source succeeds. Typically a VPN is **set on both tunnel sides a firewall** and securely sended by the **IPsec or SSL protocols.** The **Site-to-site VPNs (basic P2P connectivity)** uses **AES** algorithm for encryption and some hashing mechanisms as **MD5 or SHA** to evaluate data integrity._ 

- **Split Tunneling:** Is a VPN strategy that divides user traffic, if the host wants to connect to the corporate network it has to pass all across the VPN tunnel until reach the edge Firewall, but for other trafic such as internet the data is not process and allows rapid connectivity. **Better performance**.
- **Full Tunneling:** All host traffic have to pass through the VPN tunnel and it´s audited by the edge Firewall. Can be a secure way to permit/deny user´s traffic to public internet but comes with more delay in the network response and connectivity. **More secure**.

- **Remote Access VPN:** is a private/secure connection from any host (by a software) from the internet to the organization firewall via a VPN tunnel.
- **IPsec Tunnel:** Open standard that encrypts L3 traffic but **do not support multicast (for routing protocols).** It´s the common Site-to-Site VPN mechanism. Uses **Internet Key Exchange (IKE) for sharing pre-generated keys** in both tunnel sides.
- **Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE):** It´s an improvement over IPsec that allows multicasting
- **IPsec Virtual Tunnel Interface (IPsec VTI):** Cisco´s implementation of IPsec + GRE
- **Dynamic Multipoint VPN (DMPVPN):** Cisco´s. Scalable and simple hub and spoke style configuration that enables direct full mesh connectivity between offices.
- **FlexVPN:** Cisco´s. Similar to DMPVPN but newer.
- **Group Encrypted Transport VPN (GETVPN):** Cisco´s. Scalable and centralized VPN policy over non-public infrastructure (MPLS)