# **DNS Hosts**
_Resolve FQDN via TCP or UDP using port 53_
```
(config)# ip domain-lookup
(config)# ip host [FQDN] [ip_address]
```

# **Routing Protocols**
```
// Displays the routing table
# show ip route         

// Displays the routing protocol running
# show ip protocols   

// Display protocol configuration only
# show running-config | section [protocol]
```
```
----------------------------------------------------
|            Administrative distance table         |
----------------------------------------------------
|          Learned Route        |   Symbol   | AD  |
----------------------------------------------------
|             RIP               |     R      | 120 |
|             OSPF              |     O      | 110 |
|             EIGRP             |     D      | 90  |
|          Static Routes        |     S      | 1   |
| Default Gateway (last resort) |     S*     | 1   |
|         Local & Loopback      |     L      | 0   |
|        Direct (Connected)     |     C      | 0   |
----------------------------------------------------
```

_**Router ID**: **Highest ip address on any loopback or interface (if no loopback exists)** interface in the router that identifies the device. Also can be specified manually._

## Static Routes
_Manually defined routes to reach certain network via router´s interface or it´s gateway (neighbor attatched interface) to reach it. The **Floating Static Routes (FSR)** are **backup routes** defined with a mayor Administrative distance (AD) compared to the advertised route learned from certain protocol. (Ex. for an OSPF route (110) the AD in the FSR must be higher like 115)_
```
(config)# ip route [network_address] [subnet_mask] {[next_hop_address] | [exit_interface]} [AD_for_floating_routes]?
```

## Interior Gateway Protocols (IGP)
_Only form adjacency with directed connected networks and advertise the best routes to reach networks in the same administrative area. All IGP perform **ECMP (Equal Cost Multi Path) 4 paths max** if the same destination can be reached by same costing paths_

### Distance Vector Protocols
_Distance vector protocols send their entire routing table to directly connected neighbors, slow convergence but excellent for small administrative network usage_

#### EIGRP (Advanced distance-vector metric DUAL)
_Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP), **only supported on Cisco devices**. It´s best path decition making is based on the combination between **bandwidth + delay** by an algorith called **DUAL** (Diffusive Update Algorithm) that calculates a certain K values. Fast convergence time, efficient multicast messages, for large networks & the only configurable protocol for unequal cost load balancing._
```
// Show adjacency via EIGRP
# show eigrp neighbors

// All eigrp enabled interfaces and it´s statistics
# show ip eigrp interfaces
```
```
(config)# router eigrp [autonomous_system]
(config-router)# network [network_to_advertise] [wildcard]

// Configure manually a router ID for protocol announcement
(config-router)# eigrp router-id [router_id]

//Default route injection
(config)# router eigrp 100
(config-router)# default-information originate
```

_**Adjacency Requirements:** All **k values** and **autonomous system** must match in routers, so EIGRP can know and advertise networks_

#### RIPv2
_Routing Information Protocol (RIP), it´s best path decition making is based on the **hop count (max 15)** to reach the targeted network. Upadtes of networks are send every **30 sec** by the **224.0.0.9 multicast** address. RIPv2 support authentication and VLSM. RIPng supports !=v6 network advertisement. Protocol only used on lab/test & small networks_
```
// All routes learned by RIP and the interfaces where reach them
# show ip rip database
```
```
(config)# router rip
(config-router)# version 2
(config-router)# no auto-summary
(config-router)# network [network_to_advertise]  // Classful network

// Manual summarisation through neighborg interfaces
(config)# interface {gigabit | ethernet} {0-X}/{0-X}
(config-if)# ip summary-address rip [network_to_advertise] [subnet_mask]

// Default route injection
(config)# router rip
(config-router)# default-information originate
```

### Link-state Protocols
_Link state protocols send detail information about itself an it´s directly connected interfaces to all the routers in the network, fast convergence, high reliability but more processing needed_

#### OSPF
_Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), depends on **bandwidth** for metric calculation using the **SPF** (Shortest Path First) algorithm and advertise links in their area to each other every **10 secs (Hello packets)** by **224.0.0.5 multicast**. It´s an open standard supported by any vendor._

_OSPF Operations & Packets Messages (In order of sending)_
1. **Hello Packets**: Sended to other devices in the same area to enable adjacencies every 10 secs as default and wait until 40 secs (default dead interval = 4x hello packets) if no response is made. **Discover Neighbours**
2. **Database Description (DBD)**: Packet containing the known networks from the router to members in area. **Form adjacencies**
3. **Link State Request (LSR)**: Message send to look for information about an unknown network in the DBD. **Flood Link State Database (LSDB)**
4. **Link State Advertisement (LSA)**: Routing update send from some router in the area who can solve the LSR. **Compute the Sortest Path**
5. **Link State Update (LSU)**: Contains a list of LSAs to be updated during flooding via **224.0.0.6 multicast** address. **Install best routes in routing table**
6. **LSAck**: Acknoledgement of LSU and LSDB updated correctly. **Respond to network cahnges**

_For each network segment or subnet declared a **Designted Router (DR)** and **Backup (BDR)** will be elected based on the **highest priority (0-255) default 1** or the **highest Router ID (loopback or interface address)** this process is set automatically by OSPF but can be changed manually._

_OSPF Router Types_
- **Backbone Routers**: All of it´s interfaces belong to the area 0, they mantain a full LSDB with other routers.
- **Area Border Routers (ABR)**: They manage inter-area (IA) and external-area (EA) routes, having interfaces in multiple areas. Separate the LSA flooding zones in multiple LSDBs (one per area connected). All ABR need to defined a **manual summarization for route ranges** attatched to it´s different areas, in order to enable LSDB segregation.
- **Autonomous System Boundary Routers (ASBR)**: Redistributes routes learned from another source (static, EIGRP, RIP or other protocols) via OSPF (O*E2)

```
// LSDB Link State Data Base
# show ip ospf database 

// All information about routers links connections
# show ip ospf neighbors

// Detail information of OSPF adjacencies with OSPF
# show ip ospf interface brief
```
```
(config)# router ospf [process_id]
(config-router)# network [network_to_advertise] [wildcard] area [area_number]

// Default route injection
(config)# router ospf [process_id]
(config-router)# default-information originate

// Base-bandwidth Reference manipulation for 100 Mbps+ link usage
(config)# router ospf [process_id]
(config-router)# auto-cost reference-bandwidth [base_kbps] // 100 Mbps = 100000

// Interface manipulation cost for path preferal usage
(config)# interface {gigabit | ethernet} {0-X}/{0-X}
(config-if)# ip ospf cost [new_cost]

// Router priority manipulation for OSPF election to become DR or BDR
(config)# interface {gigabit | ethernet} {0-X}/{0-X}
(config-if)# ip ospf priority [new_priority]

// Manual summarization needed for ABR routers
(config)# router ospf [process_id]
(config-router)# area [area_id] range [network_to_advertise] [subnet_mask]
```
_**Adjacency Requirements:** All **hello (10 sec default)**, **dead time (4x hello) intervals** and **area number (Area ID)** must match in routers, so EIGRP can know and advertise networks_

#### IS-IS
_Intermediate System - Intermediate System Protocol (IS-IS), it depends on the cost of the route but the bandwidth metric is not calculated as OSPF does by default. The cost can be manually configure to manipulate the path (by default works with hop count as RIP). Used for Service Providers and large organizations over MPLS for scalability._

## Adjacency & Passive Interfaces
_Prevents or activates the transmission of hello packets for network discovery, commonly used for dynamic routing protocols to advertise networks to it´s attatched interfaces. A **passive interface can´t form adjacency** and must be redirect manually (static route). A **loopback must be set always as passive interface** because as a logical interface it´ll waste resources advertising a non-existent physical interface_
```
// Disable particular interfaces
(config)# router {eigrp | ospf | rip} [autonomous_system]?
(config-router)# passive-interface {gigabit | ethernet | loopback} {0-X}/{0-X}?

// Disable all by default & enable individually
(config)# router {eigrp | ospf | rip} [autonomous_system]?
(config-router)# passive-interface default
(config-router)# no passive-interface {gigabit | ethernet | loopback} {0-X}/{0-X}?
```

## Exterior Gateway Protocols (EGP)
### BGP
_Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)_